Frank suggested that I go back and tell Frank Gould
that we would do it his way. Do it Frank Gould's way?
Yes. And it was Frank Gould that was the one who was
first saying, don't use Webster. Right. And then
Frank Wardlaw. The standard botanical practice
was to run the words of the name together, like
buffalo grass is all one word. And I insisted on
breaking it into two words, because buffalo grass
doesn't make much sense. Well, it does to the
botanists. And so Frank Gould won the day on that
one. I still think it looks funny every time I see
those books, but who am I to insist that they change
a whole range of literature. But I remember one of
the things I said to Frank Gould, and I wish I could
take it back now, he was really a great guy. And he
must have gone home and laughed about it until he
was sick, but I told him I didn't want to contribute
to the Germanification of the English language.
Cocky kid, I
guess. As you're getting started here, what was
your normal work schedule by the day and by the
week. You got to, normally you got to the campus
about what time and did what? Oh, yeah. Well, we
worked from 8 to 5.
Did you walk or drive? I drove. I lived over on
Southwest Parkway in apartments over there. And
so I drove. And parked? We parked We had some
parking places right by the press there. There was
a parking lot behind the building. And actually,
it was on the street side of the building, but
toward the rear. And then there was a parking
garage, which the press used as the shipping room
and the warehouse. That's where all the books were
kept and shipped out from. But there was a little
parking there, and I can't remember if I, I think
though my parking was on the street. I think I had
just the random street parking for many years. All
right, was there a coffee pot at the Brass? Yeah.
You know, we were right behind Sabisa, so we could
also go over there sometimes for breaks, and then
we were right across just a few hundred feet from
campus corner, so we'd go down there. We used to go
after work, we'd go to
the Dixie Chicken or one of the other places down
there and have a few beers. But we kind of grew out of
that, I guess. Right, and then lunch would be
where? Oh, I usually went home for lunch, had lunch
at home with my wife, and then check the mail and
then get back to work. And you never had to worry
about your car being broken in? Oh, no, certainly
not. The worst thing that ever happened was that
one time I parked there and there was a fellow
mowing the grass. I didn't pay much attention to
it. When I came back out either for lunch or after
work, Apparently his mower had hit a piece of rebar
that was in the grass. It had gone right through the
side window of my car. But I went to the university
and told them about it, and they paid for it. No
problem, no questions asked. And did the press
staff do some things together? Yeah, we used to
have... Really nice receptions for authors in the
Wardlaw's residence. Frank and Rosemary's
residence was only the second place on campus
where liquor was allowed to be served. Can you
describe how that came about? Well, I wasn't here
then, of course, but I understand that that was one
of the conditions that Frank put up on coming to
Texas A&M, that he wanted to have a place. I mean, if
he was going to live on campus, he wanted to be able
to entertain guests and authors and have that kind
of... reception for new books and new authors.
That was one of the conditions he put on it, and
apparently it was approved. I assume that the
Board of Regents had to approve that, but I don't
know the story really. Let me add to this a little
bit of my own experience that I think might fit
here. I was fairly new on the job as dean of
faculties, and I got a call one Monday morning from
Dr. Jack Williams, our president, telling me to
stop what I was doing and to go over to the new
Holiday Inn and pick up Frank and Rosemary Wardlaw
and give them a tour of the campus. I said, oh,
they're visiting here. And he said, well, he's the
new director of the press. I said, press? How long
have we had a press? He said, since yesterday
afternoon when John and Sarah Lindsay got me and
Margaret and Frank and Rosemary together. And he
said, and you're the chairman of the Press Advisor
Committee. And I said, oh, who's on the committee?
And he said, you tell me who you want on there. But
then he said, your job is to tour him around the
campus. We've got to find a place to put the press.
It had been recommended that it be located in that
maroon and white building. Reed McDonald. In the
Reed McDonald building. which I and others
thought was among the least attractive buildings
on the campus and the suggestion was the basement,
the ground level, below ground level. We walked
through it and Frank was noticeably turned off and
I shared that opinion and we were driving
elsewhere on the campus looking around and as we
passed that big old board house he asked what it
was. And I told him that that was the building where
the board of, then board of directors, I don't know
whether now they're regents, where they stayed
when they came to their meeting and that they had
new quarters over in the new wing of the Memorial
Student Center and it was vacant. Well, he was much
taken by that and I understand that he then
broached the subject with Dr. Williams about
putting the press there and he and Rosemary live
downstairs and the press be upstairs. So as far as I
know that's how that came to be and I had never heard
of any other competitor for that place, so it was a
very fine use for a pleasant old structure.
Describe some of those Wardlaw-hosted social
events for authors and others. They were
wonderful. We had people in from all over Texas for
those things, and of course Frank had been in Texas
for 25 years or before, so he had lots of friends
from around the state. We had people from like John
Henry Falk and
Mrs. Dobie used to come all the time to those
receptions and parties. Well, she was also the
former Mrs. Webb, I believe, right? Isn't she the
one who was married to both men? No, no, no, no. She
was Webb's widow and had been married to former
Mayor and Congressman Maury Maverick. That's it,
Maverick. That's right, you're right. No, I
don't. Frank always called her the
double-barreled widow. And as I recall, she
always smiled over it. Yeah. And the folklore
fiction writer from over in the Big Thicket? Bill
Brett. Bill Brett. Yeah, now Bill didn't come
along until 77, I
think it was. He came in with his stories, or sent
Frank those stories. and asked if we'd be
interested. And
stolen steers was the first thing he sent. Frank, I
remember we all were talking about that. Frank
said, I received this from this fellow over in the
Big Thicket. He doesn't have any credentials, no
education much, but it's a wonderful story. And he
asked Margaret and me to read it and tell him what we
thought. And we thought it was great, too, so we
published it. And it was one of the best things we
ever did, I think. Describe Mr. Brett. Old Bill was
just an East Texas cowboy. He always said that he
had been a postmaster and cowboy and oil hand and
anything it took to raise a family.
Was he a pleasant author to deal with, to work with?
Oh, yeah. He had no preconceptions about what
publishing should be or how he should be treated by
the publisher and he just he came to us just as he
dealt with anybody else in his life you know very
straightforward and he's still he's still living
he's we're in liberty county and understand his
health's not too good so I think it'd be great for
somebody to get his story before he's gone. As you
are getting settled in as an editor, what were some
of your learning experiences?
Well, I told you about that one with Frank Gould.
That was definitely a learning experience.
I also learned a little bit more about Frank
Wardlaw. type of manager he was. And I had promised
Frank that I would stay for five years, because he
didn't want to have to replace me sooner than that.
He just wanted some continuity. And so I promised
him that I would stay at the press for five years. So
after I'd been here for a couple of years, I found
out that he was planning to retire in 78. So he was
going to be leaving sooner than I was. And also
found that after a couple of tries that he wanted me
to do my job, my part of the team, and that he
appreciated my suggestions for acquisitions.
But unless it was something that really caught his
attention, it probably was not going to be
encouraged.
Frank was... I
don't know if there's a word for it. I can't think of
a word for it. He was an autocrat, but one in a very
nice way. He ran the operation. He ran the show. And
that was that. If you weren't hired to be the
associate director of the press, He really didn't
expect any input from you in that regard. You were
hired to do your job and you did it. But he was a
wonderfully congenial manager and always was
able to
talk to people and encourage them and make them
feel like they were the most important person at
the press.
he had a wonderful way with people. Can you
remember some examples of his sense of humor? Oh
yeah, but I can't repeat those for recording.
One of the most memorable stories he ever told me
was just had to do with Wreck of a Circus Train. I
really shouldn't repeat that one on tape. Wreck of
a Circus Train. This was before you came to A&M, or
after? This was just a funny story he told. Oh, just
a funny story. It was one night after one of those
parties. As I was leaving, he told me... And the
parties quite often lasted how long? To what
hours? Oh, well... You know, if it was just the
bunch of us,
just the press crew, it could go on into the wee
hours of the morning. Generally, though, if it was
an official reception or press autographing or
just a party to honor one of the authors, it would
usually break up fairly early, midnight, 1
o'clock. Don't I remember John Henry Falk being
one of the people able to go on hour after hour after
hour. Oh, yes. Yeah. And one party was at Margaret
Ingram's house, and John Henry Falk and Bill Brett
were both there. And they started trading
stories, and that did go on for hours. But it was
just fascinating. Fascinating to hear them
trading stories with each other. As you worked for
Frank, did you become aware of any no-no's? That
no, this will not, he will not approve this or that
or something? Oh, yeah. He had a very strong sense
of what Texans wanted to read. and what they would
not tolerate in their books. And we turned down a
couple of books that had included stories that he
felt were not something that the Texas audience
for regional books would tolerate. What were
those? One of them was... Well, what were those
guidelines? Well, the guidelines were just the
kind of language that was used in the book. That the
language was too strong? Right, right.
Four-letter words were out.
And Dirty Stories were definitely out. One of
those books was published by the University of
Illinois Press just before I left there. It was one
that Frank had turned down at the University of
Texas Press. But it ended up at Illinois, and
Illinois had no problem with it. And the title of it
was Pissing in the Snow, Another Ozark Folk Tales.
that that was one that Frank turned down because he
didn't think that the market for Texas books would
support a book like that. And in fact, he thought
that there would be a negative reaction to a book
with a title like that and those kinds of stories in
it. What do you think were his favorite topics,
favorite subject areas generally? Oh, I think, of
course, the art books he loved. He loved to publish
art. He loved art. They had beautiful art
throughout their apartment. And on every wall,
you'd see these paintings by Texas artists that
were just fabulous. And so I think the opportunity
to come here to Texas A&M and the connection with
joe and betty moore who funded the start of the
texas art series i think it was just perfect it was
serendipity and and frank had found a niche that he
wanted to publish in he really enjoyed and he had
the funding to do it i think it was just perfect the
circumstances were just right now had that had
that uh link with uh the moore's already happened
before you got here yes okay so the Mondale Rogers
book was was done that was that was in the works when
I know let me think I think I copy edited the Mondale
Rogers because if I'm not I believe that was one
that came here or more after I got here because
that's the manuscript that was placed before He's
the one, the Westex's scenes. That's the one
placed before Joe Moore because he was president
of the former students that year. That's the one,
right. That was the first one in the series. Let me
add my recollection of that to this tape. Dr.
Williams and Bob Walker were going to call on J.
Harold Dunn up in Amarillo, looking for a
meaningful contribution to Texas A&M. And Mr.
Dunn, something to the effect, as I recall, he
said, Everything I've got is in cattle oil and
cotton, and right now the prices on those are down,
and I would really like to help with this, and
particularly they showed him this manuscript.
That would interest me. It's Texas art, and it's
West Texas, but I just can't right now. And Dr.
Williams said, well, while we're in the
university plane, let's stop in Midland and visit
with Joe Moore, president of former students,
just to say hello. And as I recall, Joe Moore, what
are you all doing? Where have you been? Well, we've
been in Amarillo talking to J. Harold Dunn. What
about? Well, we had this manuscript, old
manuscript. About what? Well, the West Texas Art.
Well, let me see it. I'm interested in West Texas
Art. And then he invited us to stay and have supper.
And he had shared it with Betty by then. They were
interested. could spend the night. Spend the
night, and the next morning at breakfast, if I'm
not mistaken, they committed a larger sum to endow
the series than they'd been talking. I left
Wardlaw out of this trip. Wardlaw and Williams,
and I think Bob Walker. But anyway, the gift, the
commitment to support it was larger than the
original expectation. any other special that you
thought were his pet subjects other than art?
Well, of course, the Texas regional history was
always a favorite
of his. And I think he'd been interested in Texas
history since he had come to Texas, I think. And he
knew the market for it. He knew that those books
would sell. He knew he had... the support of the
Texas State Historical Association and in
getting
in free publicity more or less, free advertising
for those books, so I think that was always a great
topic for. All right, and then at the other end of
the spectrum, what were his least favorite
topics?
Well, you know, I don't really know. I know that we
published a couple of books that we just sort of had
to do because they were by faculty members and they
were orphans, really, because we didn't have any
way to market them nationally. And
Frank would sometimes complain about those that
didn't really seem to have a place on our list, but
he felt that we were obligated to do them. and I
won't give specifics because those authors may
still be around, but there were some of those that
didn't seem to be anyone's favorite, really, but
the press had to support the faculty and publish
them. Right. As you were in those early years, give
some examples you can think of, recall, where you
felt you had really done it the way the boss wanted
it done? You felt good about his reaction to your
work?
Well, practically every book that
we did, he supported the staff. He never, I don't
remember a single time that Frank criticized any
member of the staff. for anything in any of the
books i can't think of a time never never even
thought about it really but i can't he just wasn't
that kind of manager he would emphasize the
positives but never criticize the negatives and
so he was always very positive about what we
published and if Any new book that came along, he
would just
laud everybody for it. Do you remember any,
whether it was one that you had edited or not, do you
remember any in those early years when there was a
mistake in the printed, an oversight, and then the
printed copy there was? Oh, I don't remember. I
know there must have been some. No typos, no
misspellings? No books perfect, so I can't
remember specific instruments from way back
then. I
usually try to forget about those things as soon as
possible and not make those mistakes again. In
your early books, which one did you personally
enjoy the most in the early years?
just more fun to do yeah well of course the stolen
steers so you edited that one yeah and um how much
editing did it take well quite a bit uh actually
margaret i think margaret did the first copy
editing on that yeah that was yeah that was done by
margaret ingram but i uh handled the proof on it and
uh worked with bill on it It
required quite a bit of copy editing, and it
required a special touch because it was so close to
fiction. Well, it was fiction, really, although
we labeled it as folklore. But that kind of
fiction, you don't want to over-edit. You can't
over-edit because there's so much of the author's
voice in it. over at it, then it starts to sound
wooden and stilted. So, yeah, I took a special hand
to work with that. Were there colloquial
spellings, Texas pronunciation spellings? Oh,
yeah. Yeah. Now, what would be the guideline for
that? Well,
you have to keep the author's voice and keep the
sound of the dialect, but make it readable. There
are some books of dialect that are so heavy that you
can't really read them easily. You have to work to
get that dialect. Now, if you're a native speaker,
then you can read right along with it, but I'm
talking about Most of the people that you want to
sell the book to, that you want to read that book,
are they going to be able to read it easily? And so we
had to tone down some of the dialect in Bill Brett's
books. Did you have to kind of almost compose a
reference dictionary to be sure that you were
spelling this colloquial term the same way each
time? Yeah, that was part of the style sheet.
Certainly. For a book like that, you put together a
style sheet of the spellings and punctuation, and
you follow that through the whole book. And in that
case, yes, the odd spellings, like do you spell O-L
apostrophe
or O-L-E?
I presume, would not use a linguistics
professor's style of accenting and spelling. No,
not at all. In those early years,
when you got to the office and started to work at
about 8 o'clock, about how long could you work
without any interruption or break before you had
to get up and Take a stroll, maybe? Oh, first couple
of hours, and then we'd take a break for coffee and
chit chat and get back to work. So you could sit
there? The editors are notoriously easygoing
about office hours and always have been. And so
we'd get up and visit each other in our offices and
discuss particular problems of grammar or
punctuation.
So it wasn't all just focusing on the papers right
in front of us. In those early years, if you came to a
situation where you wanted someone else's
comment, to whom did you turn? To Margaret. To
Margaret? Mainly.
If it was a really big problem, then we would go
directly to Frank. But if it was a matter of style or
punctuation, spelling, that kind of thing, And I
couldn't resolve it with my references. And
Margaret and I would discuss it. And sometimes she
would come to me and ask me about things that were
troublesome to her. Now, to show how times have
changed, I'm assuming in that era, people smoked
if they wanted to in the office. Oh, yes. Oh, yes.
What percentage of smokers were there in the press
then? Practically everybody.
Margaret and I smoked. Ray Gromyla smoked like a
chimney. Don Collins probably outsmoked the rest
of us. And then, of course, Frank had his cigars and
pipes going all the time. I tried to stop smoking in
77. That was about two years after I'd come here.
And my wife had quit when our daughter, She first
found out she was pregnant with our daughter. So
she had been quit for about four years. And I
thought, I need to stop this. I was smoking way too
much. And so I started buying cigars, too. I'd get
these little cigarillos in the little six packs or
whatever. And I'd get one of those and take it to the
press. instead of cigarettes and then portion
those out through the day. And then gradually I was
able to cut down on the number that I smoked each day
and finally quit that way. But it was tough to quit
because everybody was smoking up a storm. There'd
be a haze in that building so thick you couldn't cut
it with a knife sometimes. Like I, as a non-smoker,
I don't remember ever thinking that that area or
any other area, oh my goodness, I've got to watch
out because I'm going over where everybody
smokes. It was just so common. Oh, yeah. Even in
restaurants and so on, people smoked all the time.
We didn't pay any. I understand it's still that way
in Europe. So my wife and I want to get back to Europe
one of these days where we...